president vice president members of
council deans heads of school faculty
and distinguished guests you're all very
very welcome to rc aside this evening
for a very special event this guest
lecture is delivered by dr. Siddhartha
Mukherjee and my colleague dr. NIMH
professor Neve Morin will introduce in
more detail I think we're in for a very
special lecture a lecture titled three
visions of a medical future genes risk
and precision I think gives us some
sense of what's ahead of us I'm
delighted to welcome you to our CSI many
of you are familiar with us for some of
you it's perhaps your first time to the
College our CSI was founded in 1784
initially as a surgical College today we
are Arlen's only independent
not-for-profit focused Health Sciences
institutional with undergraduate schools
of physiotherapy pharmacy medicine
school of postgraduate studies school of
Healthcare Management a significant
Research Institute we pride ourselves in
being totally focused on healthcare and
health sciences we also take pride in
the fact that we're very internationally
focused for many many years our CSI has
been the the front line of international
students to coming to Ireland but also
we have a presence overseas with our
training institute in Dubai University
in Bahrain to medical schools in
Malaysia and we are the largest working
with Irish aid supporter of surgical
training in the 14 countries that make
up the Cossacks an area of West in
southern Africa making a significant
contribution to delivery of surgical
care in that region we adore CSI I have
spent the last year crafting our
strategy as we go forward in some ways a
celebrating the establishment of this
building and as we plan our future
campus and our future as a Health
Sciences Institute looking at how we can
make a contribution to health care
locally and globally and to us it's very
clear that we live in an age of
constraint with a real big medical issue
of our time is how can we provide high
quality safe and effective care
two growing populations with
increasingly complex diseases with
increasingly expensive treatments with
with less and it's a combination of
increasing the scope of practice of
existing professions conceiving new
professions making impactful discovery
and the early treatment prevention and
diagnosis of disease and furthermore
engaging with society and both locally
and internationally in education in
programs designed to prevent and manage
diseases already so it's particularly
pertinent that we have a scientist a
clinician of the caliber of doctor
Siddhartha Mukherjee to address us
tonight was its immense honor to be able
to talk today and thank you for inviting
me this is a great great institution
that I've admired for all my life and
it's been a real pleasure to come here
and be able to talk I in some ways this
is an unusual talk to give because this
audiences simultaneously very clinically
sophisticated scientifically
sophisticated but I wanted to go
backwards and ask some questions that
are that may be more relevant to us as a
society as a whole and one of the things
I want to achieve in this talk is to
paint with you a picture of a medical
future in cancer what what happens next
and how it might affect us and whether
we're culturally socially biologically
prepared for that moment and what its
consequences might be if we move forward
how does this scale to the rest of the
world what happens what are the
consequences for us understanding our
own bodies in in this manner I want to
begin by something that was written
about the Emperor of all maladies when
the book first came out it first came
out in 2010 and this was a review that
was then published in The New Yorker and
it ended I with a with a place that I
did
fully then understand in fact the
technology was not even there to
understand this this was a final comment
about the review but I actually grew to
understand it more especially as my own
family matured and entered a kind of
life of illness my own father written
about it and my own father antipholus
Steven shapin a historian of Medicine
wrote a world in which cancer is
normalized as a manageable chronic
condition would be a wonderful thing but
then he goes on to say but a risk factor
world in which we all think of ourselves
as precancerous as people waiting to
have cancer would not it might decrease
the incidence of some forms of
malignancy while hugely increasing the
numbers of healthy people under medical
treatment so here he's raising the
question of what it means to be over
diagnosed of course that's a medical
term but he's also raising the question
of what it means to be under
surveillance from a disease you haven't
yet had the the word that was not used
there here but has actually come into
language since then is the word provider
a provider is a survivor of a disease
that you haven't yet had that of course
generates a kind of flitter of humor but
imagine now being that person
imagine being under risk or being under
surveillance for future risk and and
think about what that would mean to us
as as human beings and finally shape and
concludes it would be a strange victory
in which the price to be paid for
checking the spread of cancer through
the body is its uncontrolled spread
through the culture I think there were
interesting words interesting idea
what's in what was to me most remarkable
that when this was written in 2010 we
did not have really the technology and
the tools to understand risk in this way
we had the potential but we didn't have
the tools in the eight odd years that
have passed since then we have entered
this world in a very forceful way we've
entered a world where where the spread
of cancer through the body is becoming
is becoming tantamount to it's
uncontrolled spread through the culture
Susan Sontag writing very famously as
you might
no cultural critic but also a writer
concluded her or pardon me began her
book illnesses metaphor by arguing that
every person has simultaneous
citizenship between the Kingdom of the
world and the kingdom of the ill that
she described it but in some text time
there was a bi-directional passage you
could enter the kingdom of the ill and
then come back to the kingdom of the
will
you had as sonntag herself would
describe you get passports to build
kingdoms the fear that shapen is trying
to illustrate and the fear that I think
is is the center of this talk is whether
we have now stopped the bi-directional
passage once you enter the kingdom of Al
you are always under surveillance
you are always under the threat of
future illness and you become a locus of
risk and of course it would be a
remarkable thing if we could use that to
decrease all illnesses and a possibility
of death or delay the possibility of
death from illness because of that
surveillance but I want to also take a
moment as we move forward to consider
what would mean for our bodies ourselves
in our cultures
so to summarize then I'm going to put
the summary of the talk right in front
because it's gonna be quite complicated
things coming down the road we are
beginning to understand cancer at a
cellular and molecular level this
understanding I think is highlighted the
enormous diversity of individual cancers
we'll talk about that that understanding
from capital C cancer cancer is a single
disease to the idea that every
individual cancer has its own set of
genetic mutations has its own behavior
and in fact maybe need to be treated in
a in a way that's that is relatively
individualized this diversity may the
emphasis is on may demand precision or
partly individualized therapies I don't
think we will get to a place where every
single patient is treated individually I
think that would break our understanding
of what it would mean to deliver
precision medicine at scale that to many
many many patients but I do think that
we will begin to parse human beings
human cancers into individual parts
breast cancer will come in
thousands of genetic and epigenetic
subtypes which will then demand
individualized therapies for those
subtypes and also we know that early
treatment is likely to bring benefits if
you put these two points together this
is the the notion of diversity and and
the fact that early treatment is likely
to bring benefits then detecting early
and treating precisely are likely to be
themes in the medical future of cancer
this really falls out of the first the
last two pieces and and then comes the
the piece that I want to consider
ultimately which is that however such a
world of surveillance diagnosis and
treatment carries cultural burdens that
we are I would I would argue still
unprepared for and that's really the
focus in the center of this talk about
genes risk and precision so I'm I'm
gonna actually take an unusual break
here and and and take you to a moment in
in in the film that I did with Ken this
was for PBS it was a vast production
ultimately reaching several several
million viewers for three nights but I
was particularly moved by one tiny
episode of a woman entering this world a
woman entering this world of genetic
risk and precision medicine and that's
the story of Lori Wilson Lori Wilson is
a breast surgeon she is a teacher she is
still alive today is a teacher and her
practice is in the in at a major
hospital near Baltimore and in the
middle of her practice as a resurgence
she gets ironically diagnosed with
bilateral breast cancer herself and she
goes back in a very moving moment this
was actually captured in film in an
unanticipated way we heard news and she
was extraordinarily generous to let us
allow us to film her journey with with
her as a really as it as something that
that her residents could learn from is
an extraordinary human being but she
goes back then to her own professor who
she she she trained with to have her
mastectomy done
and this is a moment in which she's just
about to catch the flight but entering
this this piece was called on the
cutting floor it was called welcome to
cancer land entering this world of
genetic risk surveillance see then gets
genetically tested she then enters her
her chemotherapy and finally enters a
word in which she is technically cured
of the cancer but she has to
continuously monitor herself and be
continuously monitored for future risk
of cancer she has now acquired that one
directional passage into the world of
the ill so I'm gonna break here and I'm
gonna ask for some help because I don't
know how to operate these fancy pieces
this is a short clip from the film
called welcome to cancer land or Lori
Wilson's haircut it's been a month since
Lori's diagnosis and her 20 week regimen
of chemotherapy has begun
[Music]
what are you doing I'll go first
yeah my husband actually is gonna shave
his head with me and so we will until my
hair grows back we'll both be bald
together he's my rock
he's been there for everything don't
forget I've been bullheaded before 20
years ago yeah before Laura and I got
together in the first winter when I grow
in her and then Lord liked my hair when
I haven't shaved it since you can take
it off all kinds
[Music]
I don't buy into the limey because so
much of cancer is not predictable
there's not said on family history or
any feature and so absolutely it could
be me hey you recognize mom II have a 19
month old and I want to see my son grow
up see my son get married and go to grad
school all the good stuff that we expect
for family and with this diagnosis
that's more difficult thing to see
well we get back in I make all my
students watch that until it it's
unbearable and then the reason is
because as we as we are trying to find
invent new therapies for cancer
we have no idea until we become patients
ourselves what it's like to enter this
world and I think it's absolutely
important as in the profession of
medicine to understand what what it's
like being on the other side because we
will be on the other side at some point
of time as well but also because that's
fundamentally about what we do in in the
delivery of medicine I'm going to take a
little bit of a tour then to bring us up
to this place the so called welcome to
cancer land space and it will be a
little bit of a detour through history a
couple of slides and then I'm going to
talk a little more deeply about
precision risk and and what it means for
the future so long before the word
cancer existed long before the even the
idea of cancer existed the question of
what it would mean to diagnose cancer
was there because cancer is an ancient
midlist we didn't know words for it we
didn't have the language of the
vocabulary for it this is probably the
first time cancer is described in human
history it's this is from the Edwin
Smith papyrus described as a mass in the
breast as dense encoded as a human fruit
and this this was actually a surgical
document many of you are familiar with
this map iris and and one of the things
that that's written in the document is
that there is no treatment
there was no way at least the ancient
surgeons had no way to find a treatment
and the word cancer didn't arise until
much later it was it's rumoured we don't
know that Hippocrates himself used the
word cancer partly because all the word
karkinos rather because the he imagined
or the contemporaneous surgeons imagined
disease it looked like a crab buried
underneath the sand because all the
blood vessels around it were like the
legs of the crab other people think that
it has to do with the movement of cancer
in the body the Matassa metastatic
quality of cancer in the body but
nonetheless this metaphor stuck through
history and the once that word was
coined it somehow described so many
things we began to find metaphors within
that metaphor of cancer using that idea
to describe this this set of illnesses
but what the cause was what why these
illnesses arose in the first place
remained an enormous mystery until
really work done by several people I'm
here highlighting work done by work ow
work how was a cellular physiologist
pathologist but work how was interested
in in he began with very simple tenets
very simple ideas very simple principles
and that idea was the idea that that all
cells came from other cells that it
didn't arise out of out of the blue out
of they did not arise from miasma or
from from some kind of gaseous substance
that the only way a cell could arise was
from a previous cell like a radical idea
and it's time do we take it vastly for
accepted but a radical idea in its time
and if you then thought through that
process if you taught thought to the
process of if all cells arise rose from
other cells and work how also along with
his contemporaries realized that cancer
was a cellular disease it was a disease
of cellular growth cellular aberration
whenever he looked at pathological
specimens he found in overabundance of
cells he he wondered whether it was
actually the growth of cells that was
out of control but if you thought about
that you quickly realized that if cancer
cells arose from cells then they must
arise in turn from normal cells so
something must have happened some
activity must have happened to convert a
normal cell into a cancer cell and the
question then became what was that what
what how what had happened
the process was later known as
transformation because obviously
something vast had changed in the
physiology ology of the cell a normal
cell knows when to stop dividing one
idea that I'd like to plant to him again
with my students when I when I talk to
them is it's astonishing to me that when
you cut yourself you don't grow a new
hand what prevents us like trees from
constantly growing new limbs and
branches obviously some process which we
still don't fully understand we
understand some principles a bit but you
would be you know this is one of those
mysteries that keeps thickening the more
you study biology why is it that that a
wound knows how to heal itself and then
stop healing whereas obviously many
tumors don't know how to stop growing
their cellular systems are aberrant but
Brooke how didn't know that and for a
long time the only solution to this was
to remove the without understanding the
cause was to remove the the the lesion
the culprit lesion and that of course
led to the golden age of cancer surgery
we will come back to cancer surgery as
the mainstay of cancer therapy the
pillar on which early cancer therapy is
still for solid tumors still is built
but but the idea then eventually as I
described in the book many many times we
will see this coming over and over again
they're very successful powerful idea
becomes a seduction in itself in cancer
it becomes a fully circular the logic
becomes fully circular and that was
circularized
that logic was made fully internal by
williams toward Halsted the great
surgeon who began to advance the theory
that if local if a lift local therapy
for breast cancer was was good then more
local therapy was better and even more
local therapy was even better thereby
progressing therapy slowly towards an
ultra radical and in his students
towards a super radical mastectomies
that would popular in the 40s 50s and
60s this is a quote from house which I
found removing the patient was a young
woman who I was loath to disfigure but
the idea that you had to somehow intrude
or invade a person's body and make them
undergo a sacrifice off off the self
in order to get rid of the cancer was
very much part of the seduction of this
early period of radical therapy for
surgery but it wasn't until really the
1960s 70s and 80s decades after the
success of surgical therapy for cancer
tipping over towards the X excess of
radical surgery that we began to
understand what that mysterious cause
that had had had fascinated workou was
many people were involved in this work
I'm not gonna take individual names but
the the idea that came out of the 1980s
in cancer was a truly transformative
idea and that is that cancer occurs when
normal growth controlling genes
metabolism controlling genes are mutated
and these mutations thereby fail to tell
us cell how to stop growing and and
co-opt the physiology of the cell
towards malignant growth to some extent
they also occasionally tell us cell to
stop dying but really it is a it is a
compound or it's it's a consequence of
mutations in genes that ultimately cause
cells to stop knowing how to regulate
their normal physiological growth and
this was described by Howard Barmes and
others but picking up a lovely phrase
from Beowulf in which he described
cancer as a distorted version of our
normal selves and of course that
explained this idea that cancer arose as
a consequence of mutations in normal
cellular genes in genes that are present
in every cell for mutations in those
genes those growth controlling genes
ultimately Unleashed cancerous growth
was a was an idea that sent a real chill
up the spines of the entire field of
cancer biology because the very genes
that caused our wounds to heal ourselves
to grow our blood to be able to fight
infections those very genes in their
mutual aid form in the mutated mutant
forms were now implicated as as cancers
as causal for cancer the other thing
that was very important is that they
solved a very
particular mystery that had been raging
in the field for a very long time which
is we knew that that that heredity was
involved in cancer because you had
familial risk of cancer this is a
picture of of the of the of the
Brazilian ophthalmologist hilarya Juvia
who had tracked retinoblastoma eye
cancers very rare unusual cancers
criss-crossing through a particular
resilient family but eventually found in
many other families so their heredity
was involved here is a picture of
Percival Pott sir Percival Pott who as
many of you know was among the first to
coin the idea that some factor in the
environment which he called he actually
coined the term carcinogen something
that would give rise to cancer some fact
in the environment could also cause
cancer he did this by famously
associated chimney sweepers young boys
who swept chimneys with a high risk of a
particular form of scrotal cancer and he
surmised something in chimney dust was
was causing this unusual form of cancer
chance was known to play a role for a
long time there were people with no
histories of cancer no known exposures
who would suddenly develop cancer and
finally Peyton Rous made the argument in
1900 in 1900 said viruses were
implicated in in the development of many
cancers now for a long time the question
is how you could he you know square
these four pieces that seemed very
disparate but of course by the 1980s if
you suddenly understood that at the
center of all of this were the genes in
in your cells the mystery of multiple
causes could be solved because heredity
you can either you could inherit the
genes from your parents you could mutate
the genes by through the in through
environmental influences such as chimney
soot or such as x-rays you could develop
mutations by virtue of chance when cells
divide like all copying machines they
make errors so you could mutate the
genes of the consequence of chance and
viruses could tamper with your genetic
material or bring in foreign genetic
material that would thereby allow you to
a cell that is now carrying material
genetic material that is ultimately
result results in cancer so everyone
clear so far this was a major moment for
our field where the mystery of multiple
causes was was partly solved and and
this gave rise to I mean this was
coincident with with with with with the
1960s suddenly the locus of illness
moving from outside us to inside us
famously captured by the sentence we
have met the enemy and he is us from
there on that's sort of where our story
takes off in terms of of risk and
precision we knew by the 1980s and
certainly by the early 1990s that as I
said before genetic changes in cells was
responsible for the development of
individual cancers but the question then
became well what is what what is the
similarity or difference between two for
two breast cancers say is it the same
mutation is that one mutation per cancer
is that different set of mutations five
mutations for different cancers breast
cancer has five retinoblastoma has three
sarcoma has seven what is the what's the
spectrum look like and there were many
many ideas about this but the real
solution to this came from the genome
projects you know we think about the
human genome project as a kind of you
know end in itself but of course for
from the standpoint of a cancer biology
the human genome project is just a
template for the Cancer Genome Project
which is a mechanism or an effort to
understand the diversity of cancers
based on their genetic fingerprint so
genetics so again this is a schematic
here leading up to art ar-ar-ar-ar talk
but by the 1990s and early 2000s we
began to ask the question if you take
five specimens of breast cancer so just
restricting it to breast cancer say or
five specimens of lung cancer what is we
know that in all cases will find mutated
genes that's the central cause are they
the same are they different how are they
similar how are they different
and here was the surprise here was they
was the powerful message that came out
of that story so here's a schematic
here's a woman who comes into your
clinic
let's say she has breast cancer we're
using that as an example still and we
have the capacity as we acquired to map
the genetic mutations in her cancer so
imagine that all her genes her genome is
like a big snake that's crossing Criss
crossing this blank sheet of paper and
you find your capacity to map the
genetic mutations that she has this one
woman has in her breast cancer and
they're 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 genes that are
mutated the number can be anywhere
between 8 to 130
so I've just chosen a simple example
here a second woman comes into your
clinic also has breast cancer and
previously would be you know we would
looked on the microscope and conclude
that she had breast cancer but now we
looked on the genetic microscope and
find that she has a spectrum of
mutations in her breast cancer in her
case also eight genes but they're not
the same age as the first woman and
here's the third woman who comes in and
they're they're even more discordant to
some extent now what's interesting about
this and this turned out to be a
principle which was true for virtually
all cancers not every cancer but
virtually most common cancers in which
the spectrum of genetic mutations of the
individuals fingerprint of genetic
mutations for one cancer was not the
same as a second cancer even within the
same subtype ma is that clear it's the
foundation on which that this talk is is
based so there has to be very clear in
other words at two specimens of breast
cancer even though they might look
similar under the microscope carry
different spectra of mutations in their
genes in their genomes we have never
experienced we've never encountered a
disease with this level of genetic
diversity in which every single example
of that disease is its own example of
the disease and we eventually found out
that it's actually even true at a
cellular level if you take one tumor and
you looked at the cells in that one
tumor it turns out that even there
within that one tumor there are there
are slightly different variations in
genetic mutations so the level of
genetic diversity goes right down to the
cellular level not just in an individual
level so
one of the things that we began to do in
the 1990s is to look at this data and
throw our hands up and say is there any
possible way to organize this
information so that at least we can be
systematic about how to treat cancer how
to think about risk how to think about
genetic risk for an individual cancer
and one way to organize this of course
is just to ask the question well what
are the most frequent mutations here's
one that's present in all three
specimens here's another one that's
present only in one specimen not present
in any other specimen so can you
now collapse all these charts and make a
kind of landscape view of cancer and
this was what we actually looked like
this is colorectal cancer and here you
see common mutations these big Peaks
that are common across many many
individuals individuals and then you see
rare ones these white dots are mutations
that occur only in one individual and
not in any other individual I hope this
is now clear in terms of what the actual
diversity of cancers looks like looked
like at that point of time so and this
is just to illustrate that you had all
kinds of mutations some were common some
were less common some were extremely
uncommon in these cancers so you could
then begin to think about these cancer
cells or these cancers as a kind of
malignant machine in which not one gene
but a kind of network of genes was
communicating with each other driving
the physiology or the aberrant
physiology of the cancer it wasn't one
gene per cancer it was as if it was
there were parts of cogs to a machine in
which parts of the machine were driving
the physiology of the aberrant behavior
of the cancer cell at that point of time
a nihilist would say you know this is
far too complicated we cannot possibly
make sense of this kind of information
with every individual patient carrying
individual mutations but the field moved
on and we began to ask the question what
if we took for instance genetic sorry
not a genetic but a therapy and we
matched the therapy we found we matched
that therapy with the individual
fingerprint of the cancer in other words
instead of treating indiscriminately
with chemotherapy cell destroying cell
killing compounds chemicals what have we
found a way to target a particular
Achilles heel a particular
weakness of one cancer matching that
weakness that genetic weakness with the
therapy so that if you had that genetic
weakness in your genetic vulnerability
in your cancer you would benefit from
the therapy but if you didn't have it
you would not benefit from that therapy
and there are many examples of this or
the one that shows Anisa septon
Herceptin is a drug that attacks
antibody that attacks one particular
genetic aberration in one kind one
subset of breast cancer it will not work
if you do not have that genetic
aberration and therefore only is is a
successful therapy for people who carry
that genetic aberration and this is a
picture that of Barbara Bradfield's bad
field was in the first trial of
Herceptin this is the phase one really
phase zero phase one trial of Herceptin
when she's when they when they first
launched the drug she almost refused
that her stories in my book I've
encouraged you she's and she was
interviewed also for for the film this
was about 18 17 odd years ago was when
she was first diagnosed with breast
cancer she happened to be patient one on
the trial she also happened to be have
the best response to Herceptin in the
entire study
she almost refused to do it but
ultimately it was a very persistent
surgeon and the very persistent
oncologist who kept calling her and
saying would you please enroll and she
was going to take you know she was gonna
take juices in Mexico but instead she
went to LA and and became the first
patient she had metastatic her2 positive
breast cancer and had a really
spectacular response and is actually
alive today so she has is not only
patient one is actually the longest
surviving human being to be on Herceptin
therapy but the principle of Herceptin
therapy is just a principle it's not it
doesn't apply it applies across the
board which is that if you find a
powerful molecular mechanism driving the
genetic mechanism driving the individual
behavioral growth for cancer cell you
can on certain occasions intervene it
proved the point that you could do this
in a systematic way without giving talks
chemotherapy in isolation um and this is
actually from that pivotal trial this
was published in the New England Journal
Medicine which showed very clear thesis
these are patients with disseminated or
metastatic her2 positive breast cancer
you what was very clear is that if you
did not have the genetic mutation or the
vulnerability you would not benefit from
the treatment in other words those those
patients would look exactly the same
these are survival curves people in the
audience may be familiar with them but
these are survival curves starting with
a hundred percent survival obviously at
the beginning of the trial if you took
no Herceptin then you unsaddle e rapidly
passed away in a course about twenty
months were with Herceptin that was that
was prolonged so significantly that you
know you could do statistics on this but
you did not need statistic swab we used
to have a an instructor I'm sure this
has been said many times before is that
if you look at a if you look at a a plot
in and you could put a finger in between
the two lines you don't need to do
sophisticated statistics to figure out
whether the drug is whether the drug is
working or not that's true for
penicillin it's also true for Herceptin
anyway so back to Herceptin also called
trastuzumab but a second important
principle fell out of that and this now
bring deepens us in our plot which is
that if you took patients with
metastatic breast cancer and not I'm
sorry if that's not visible but that's
just metastatic breast cancer so this is
patients like Barbara Bradfield their
cancer has been discovered found late in
the in the journey of cancer found late
in their their history of cancer then
certainly you found benefit so this is
patients treated with or versus without
Herceptin II you can clearly see a
massive change in survival of these
patients but and there was a huge but
here which we hadn't expected it was
really a surprise and actually actually
one of the most beautiful surprises in
medicine which is that if you now gave
patients Herceptin after diagnosing
early disease that is they had had
cancer detected in their in their breast
and the surgeon removed that cancer
there was no physical sign or visible
of cancer left in the body so these
people were at risk for metastatic
disease if there were certain cells left
over in their body there too Herceptin
was successful and and in fact
remarkably successful this is so-called
adjuvant therapy for Herceptin this is
what we actually now routinely are
giving and that is patients who've had a
primary breast tumor removed sometimes
small sometimes big genetically
characterized as I said before so there
we understand a genetic risk and then
give them a drug even if there is no
sign of cancer left in their body these
people are technically disease-free they
have no evidence of disease but we still
gave them Herceptin to clear out remnant
dormant cancer cells that we had been
missed or somehow had escaped the local
surgical excision they too had benefit
and now their survival climbed to about
93 percent 90 now it's about 90 with new
drugs it's about 92 percent that's an
incredible number
in other words 90-odd percent of women
with a common variant of breast cancer
her2 positive breast cancer we're having
survivals of in as I said in the 90
percent at five years
that's a transformational therapy for
cancer and of course there are other
examples of this they're not terribly
common we haven't achieved this in
virtually you know we haven't achieved
this in many cancers but this was a very
pivotal moment in the in 2005 when this
trial first came out and there grew from
this again I'm not sure if you can see
this so sorry about the colors but I'll
read it out but can you see this in the
back yes you can okay I can so um but
there grew an important idea which which
I discussed recently at our main
Clinical Oncology meeting which is this
idea of an experiment which is could we
now imagine a world in which we detect
cancer early and then personalize based
on genetic assessment and then give some
kind of targeted therapy or
immunological therapy could we now
change the direction of cancer an
experiment we have not so again and we
then began to think of cancer as a
disease of mitigated risk
which is can we reduce those at risk by
identifying them can we detect early and
identify those likely to progress and
then can we treat with the most
effective least toxic therapy and
maintain a response mission it was a new
kind of map of thinking about cancer
rather than you know how do we attack
and kill a tumor once it's spread all
over the body we can we push the
diagnostic clock backwards do as minimal
invasion remove the primary tumor
characterize it genetically and then
deliver therapy and of course these
coming doublets or pairs one of them has
to do with risk the second has to do
with the detection the third has to do
with therapy so this in I would say in
the 2000s were in the 2000s now so what
we identify people at risk and we had in
fact a traditional way of identifying
people at risk
we called it taking a patient's history
and physical you ask them questions
about their own history their family
history we ask them questions about
their exposures we ask them we try to
determine who is at a higher risk for
this kind of cancer in breast cancer
they had particular epidemiological
studies that allowed us to find out
women who had been higher or lower risk
and then we also ask questions about
heredity the problem was that once in a
while we would get powerful here at
hereditary stories mom had breast cancer
grandma had breast cancer paternal
cousin maternal cousin etc and when the
histories were that strong we began to
identify single genes like Braca one
like bracket 2 which would track those
histories and allow us to enable us to
understand why this particular woman in
the clinic had breast cancer that
particular man in the clinic had an
unusual sarcoma because his father his
uncle his etc had also had some other
cancers so we found single genetic
vulnerabilities that tracked through
families but we were still lacking a
kind of deep analysis of risk and but we
began to build even from those simple
ideas some sense of what might happen in
the future that
history and generics would somehow
funnel into our assessment of risk that
we would then screen or biopsy these
people these patients if we had cancer
detected we would then deliver precision
therapy so they said from that from this
days of Herceptin we had taken yet
another step towards trying to diagnose
cancer earlier trying to intervene less
and trying to personalize or target the
therapy since that time 2005-2006
another ten orders has passed and now we
are really deepening our understanding
of these ideas and that this is where my
where I'm ending going to end my my my
talk and that is that we are finally
moving from the simple assessment of
genetic risk to the complex assessment
of genetic risk so I'll give you an
example of this and now talk about some
of the themes that are emerging in in
the future so here is a simple pedigree
of breast cancer this is a genetic risk
for breast cancer Kerry in this case by
the bracket1 gene mutation most of you
are familiar with it but if you're not
think of it as a mutation that in
carried across multiple generations that
increases the risk of not just breast
cancer but also other cancers breast
cancer in women to some extent there
other genes that have risk for men but
also other cancers that are carried that
are increase in risk if you have the
genetic mutation this mutation was
identified using very classical genetic
studies and we actually by 2005-2006 we
were actually tracking had vast programs
across the world in in the UK in Ireland
in in in Asia certainly in the United
States cohorts of women with baraka one
gene mutations who we were diagnosed as
carrying brocco bomb mutations and who
we were following to find out what the
best way to treat survey and and
understand the biology of these of these
patients the word previa work came from
that cohort actually these were the
women who coined the word pre Viper to
describe their sense or state in the
world in which they felt they didn't
have cancer but they were under constant
threat of cancer for future cancers
occurring so but the problem was that if
you took
a hundred women with familial breast
cancer so you know that there's a family
history of breast cancer and ask the
question how many of those can be
explained by single gene mutations like
bracket 1 or bracket 2 you're only stuck
with about 25-30 percent seventy five
percent of those hundred seventy five of
those hundred women we knew had familial
risk their pedigree actually might look
exactly like this
you know grandmother with breast cancer
mother cousin etc with breast cancer but
we had no way of diagnosing those people
because we didn't know what the risk was
carried by we didn't know what the genes
were and we knew that wasn't one gene
because of the nature of the often of
the pedigrees but we didn't know what
their risk would be and again from the
from the from the community of women
with familial breast cancer came the
word bracket 3 bracket 3 to describe not
bracket 1 and bracket 2 but bracket 3 as
a kind of shadow of genetic shadow that
you couldn't put your hands on you
couldn't put your finger on but existed
we knew existed because you could see it
in the family
history but you couldn't a woman would
come and say look I have a family
history of breast cancer what should I
do and we could not say you know your
risk is heightened compared to your
sister because we had no idea what the
gene was there was no real way to assess
those genes so one of the things that's
happened in that period of time is that
we're now entering an arena in which we
are diagnosing understanding this risk
in complex through complex genetics it's
not one gene but maybe 100 maybe 200
maybe 500 genes each of which increases
contributes to a tiny increase in risk
it's like death by a thousand cuts and
and the cumulative risk may have may
rise to a woman who has just that one
powerful drop of one gene mutation but
it's carried not by one gene but by
hundreds maybe even on sometimes up to a
thousand genes and the paradigm for that
might be human height so human height is
a great example so highly heritable tall
parents tend to produce Torture and
shorter parents tend to produce shorter
children but in all the efforts to find
you know determinate genetic
determinants of human height we'd only
found a smattering right some very
extreme
cases Marfan syndrome mucus identified
single genetic changes which increase
high but you know it was very hard to
explain such a common phenomenon as
human height based on genetic analysis
well that began to change and really was
was one of the models for this so I'll
give you this one example this actually
this paper I found while looking through
the I've been interested in human height
not for personal reasons but but bribing
is in human height for exactly this
characteristic because although it seems
so far away from cancer it is in fact
carries all the lessons that we have to
learn in cancer and genetic risk here's
a paper based on the UK biobank in which
several hundred thousand now human
beings a sequence was deposited along
with a lots of biometric data Heights
age risk of cancer ovarian cancer breast
cancer other things and you could now
use standard computational technologies
to go and ask the question can you
reconstruct from the genetic
architecture what their features will be
so here is height I found this type this
this study has so many consequences and
so many ethical consequences really
boggles the mind but anyway here is the
algorithm here's an algorithm that was
developed from by a group here's the
actual height and here is the predicted
height now remember we are basing this
just on genetic information alone in
other words if this was an infant in
utero this would be based on a drop of
blood that came from the the infant's
bloodstream if this was a fingerprint or
a brush of DNA that was found it would
be based on just that not knowing who
the person was and this algorithm
performs remarkably well so a perfect
fit would be a straight line going up
and this is what the actual fit is in
other words you could now get to a place
where within about half a centimeter or
maybe about you know five six
centimeters at the at the at the far
limit you can diagnose human height
based on just genetic information alone
of course it's a you know still much to
be refined we do
this is applicable across all geographic
populations so much to be done here but
nonetheless and what's interesting about
it is that in this case three to five
thousand genes were involved so 10
percent of of our genetic 10 odd percent
of our genetic variability was required
to explain the variation in human height
then things got close to home
this is breast cancer using now not
machine learning but simple additive
learning still a complicated algorithm
so here is the genetic risk for breast
cancer again from the same cohort I'll
give you one example from heart disease
and then go on to breast cancer in a
second so here is heart disease this is
the population right here's a tiny top
2.5 percent of the population that has a
score up to 4 fold so in other words
here is a person who sits in this
genetic risk category who has 8 fold the
risk of cardiovascular disease compared
to the rest of the population they have
eight eight to ten fold the risk and you
can do the same for breast cancer these
are people who don't have the bracket
one in bracket two genes but have on the
order of hundreds of individual genetic
mutations genetic variations that are
adding up to the risk so here's one
example in breast cancer you don't have
to focus on all the details but this is
the top point two five percent of the
distribution that top 2.5 percent
distribution carries 5 fold or 4.5
forward the risk of breast cancer
compared to everyone else so this is
bracketry these women have that that
long sought after bracket 3 and there
will be even deeper refinements there
will be women in the top top 0.125
percent of the population who will have
7 fold the risk or 9 for the risk
compared to everyone else is everyone
following all of this by the way sorry
so and here's where this is for obesity
by the way mister obesity highly
heritable top point 2 5 percent of the
population carries six point seven seven
percent of risk so you could identify a
person likely to become obese and have
all the future risks
diseases associated with obesity in
utero based on risk assessment of this
form again has to be extrapolated to a
wider population but you can already
start seeing what this world has begin
beginning to look like in which you are
beginning to parse future illness before
the illness is occurred and that
genetics is not the only I'll take a
small detour but genetics is not the
only way of course to understand future
risk this is an actual case this is my
friend with a Pierce key this is the
picture of will have taken about five
years ago he's a obviously a young man
this was taken at a wedding of a friend
of his and if you look carefully you
would see his mother got these pictures
for me if you look carefully there'll be
two lesions one here and one over here
[Music]
one of them is malignant turned out to
be a malignant melanoma and we now know
from work done actually now repeated a
couple of times that you can use just
the imaging alone potentially even in
imaging from a high-resolution
photograph to diagnose malignant versus
benign lesions by using an algorithm by
itself a deep learning or a machine
learning algorithm can diagnose these
now to me I've seen hundreds maybe a
several hundred melanomas I could not
tell you for without a pathologist cell
for the life of me why this lesion is
malignant while that lesion is benign
they look exactly the opposite to me but
this algorithm can this algorithm
classified based on 500,000 pictures of
melanoma to distinguish between
malignant and benign lesions and one
thing I always tell again the residence
just to scare them Jesus out of them is
that when that when they start learning
learning they start with they go from
the first case the see growth takes them
from a case study of zero to a case
study of one when I add one more case to
this computer database it goes from case
study of five hundred thousand to five
thousand and one so you can imagine that
the accumulative learning for this is
enormous and this is a we will
I suspect fuse with these detect
detection devices like chimeras in order
to carry forward the next generation of
the matter pathologic diagnosis and
other diagnosis this is another study
this is not coming out of Stanford
Sebastian Thrun work which attempts to
do this for pancreatic cancer cancer
that's been very very hard to detect as
many of you know this actually acts as a
fascinating device who knows whether
it's going to work or not so I want to
push it but this is a device that scans
you it's a it's built into a bathtub so
it's an ultrasound device that you would
enter every day and that would survey
you silently and and then use a learning
algorithm to figure out whether you had
some changes which would then prompt by
surveillance biopsy and so forth and
finally I wanted to talk about this
which is a very impressive early data
from several projects which uses liquid
biopsies to deepen your understanding of
risk so again going down the process you
identify a person with a genetic risk
for breast cancer or lung cancer you
then enter some kind of surveillance
program a maybe a scanning program might
be a way to follow you metabolically in
this case it this takes DNA floating DNA
from your from your body and ask the
question is there some is there a hint
or a sign of malignancy arising in that
DNA if there is can we track it down to
find out where that is and if there is
can we actually remove it obviously and
it cannot be emphasized enough these
studies have to be carried out and full
because we don't know whether these
cancers that we're detecting are real or
not are they likely to cause disease are
they not are we just detecting thin air
are we detecting because we get for the
sake of detecting and that's the problem
overdiagnosis and overtreatment that has
been raised many many times in the
process and finally if you do find a
cancer who is the person likely to
progress this is this is an area that
actually I work on most most actively in
in blood cancers but again to find
mechanisms to identify people who are
likely to have metastatic or advanced
disease versus those cancers that are
likely to progress and one of the things
that that has brought forward is the
final frontier of of risk which is that
it's not just genetics it's not just the
genome but it's the cells that surround
the cancer here is the first
immunological therapy for lung cancer
which is directed not at the lung cancer
itself but at waking up the immune
system that surrounds the lung cancer
and delivering an immunological hit a
t-cell hit to the lung cancer and that
was very successful in in in smoking
related lung cancer this is the pivotal
trial that showed that and so as I said
precision therapies used to be about
genes and genomes it is increasingly
about things outside the tumor including
the immune system the tissue the organ
the host and in the future the microbial
environment that we live in really early
days to detect that so um as we as we as
we hurtle towards the end I was reminded
of this of his famous being a New Yorker
I couldn't resist a a cartoon from The
New Yorker which is this cartoons called
the view from 9th Avenue drawn by by
Steinberg from from ninth Avenue the
only thing you can really see is tenth
Avenue that's Europe sorry that's Texas
that's Kansas City that's Nebraska
that's China Japan Russia and somewhere
in the distance is in the rest of the
world and if you were to look this way
you'd see you know a speck of Ireland a
speck of Europe and then further out
into into into nowhere for for us for a
long time the situation was that we were
stuck with just the genome as a locus
for risk and cells patients the
environments host metal balls Marvin
could be yeah you know could be Russia
and Japan as far as we were concerned
but that is changing now we are
beginning to suddenly understand risk
not only as genetic risk but as things
that are much more proximal what is the
environment with the tumor can we change
that does is that telling us something
about whether the patient is largely to
progress or not are there people in this
audience who have incipient cancers and
the answer is yes who are controlling
their cancer is by virtue
of something that's active in their
immunological millou if we could find
that substance we could find that thing
could we take you into a different
category of someone who's like unlikely
to have genetic risk but of course it
would be a more physiological a micro
environmental cellular factor that we
would identify this is active work this
is work that we are doing this my my lab
is very much involved in in trying to
understand understand particularly the
metabolism and the patient host
relationships here so to come back then
to this kind of idea that ultimately we
would use our understanding of history
and genetics to funnel through a kind of
system by which we would enter deeper
and deeper understanding deeper and
deeper categorization a kind of report
card containing both genes and micro
environmental features that would allow
us to to deepen our understanding of
those who are likely to have cancer I
want to end therefore with a quote that
I that I with an important book that I
read much later and I couldn't help but
remember the striking parallels to
cancer and that is the idea of a total
institution Erving Goffman the
sociologist coined that the idea of a
total institution which is a place of
work of residence where a great number
of similarly situated people cut off
from a wider community for a
considerable time together lead an
enclosed formally administered and I
would say formally surveyed kind of life
or round of life this total institutions
Goffman used it to refer to penalizing
institutions like prisons like cults
like concentration camps but I wonder
whether we're suddenly as we widen or
dilate the surveillance of cancer we are
also entering cancer as a total
institution I'm an oncologist let me be
very clear no one I'm sure and we all
would be would be thrilled we would
thrill to the prospect of being able to
prevent and diagnose cervical cancer
before it took hold of your body we
would be thrilled we would be we would
be we would we would
to the prospect of ovarian cancer
diagnosed before it had metastasized
into the momentum we would we we our
dreams would come true if we could find
gastric cancer before it fell I fell off
the stomach and fell into the the
peritoneal cavity and caused
diffusely metastatic gastric cancer we
cannot treat today
but that moment comes with with a with a
cultural interception with an
understanding of the body which we are
yet to be fully aware of so I returned
then back to Stephen shaping's quote
which is the understanding of the world
of cancer as a manageable chronic
condition but a risk factor world would
not be and and to end just recall that
that these the confiscation of these
passports between the kingdom of the
well in the kingdom real of the ill
making just a one-way street carries
consequences not only for medicine but
for society and the world at large thank
you thank you very much
[Applause]